NARRATOR: Previously on
Once Upon A Time...
EMMA: An‘hur knows we freed Merlin
and he's really not happy about it.
I've been waiting for you, Emma.
GUINEVERE: Take this traitor to the dungeon,
Where he belongs.
REGINA: "The Crimson Crown."
It's used to communicate
through magical barriers.
We must've been trying
to communicate with Merlin.
Can you free Emma from the darkness?
Sure.
How long do you think you can
hold my heart and threaten me?
As long as it takes
for me to get what I want.
The only one
who can get me that sword is you.
I can't be the hero you want.
What are you doing?
Reminding you
what you have to fight for.
(WHOOSHING)
(MEN GROANING)
Not bad for a bloke who spent
the last 1,000 years in a tree.
-Just like riding a bike.
-(WHOOSH|NG)
Won't be long before
Arthur knows we're here.
How do you know what a bike is?
Do you really think all my prophecies
came true because of luck?
This way.
(MEN SPEAKING INDISTINCTLY)
Bloody hell.
You really can see the future.
Bits and pieces. Yeah.
LANCELOT: Charming?
It's okay. Mary Margaret and l
are no longer under Arthur's control.
How did you break his thrall over you?
They didn't, mate.
Idid.
Merlin.
MERIDA: What about me, now?
You here to free me, too?
-Merida?
-How did you end up in there?
Long story.
But after what your daughter did to me,
-letting me out is the least you can do.
-K|LL|AN: Aye.
She's right.
Emma would want us to free her.
Indeed. But much has changed
in the past millennia.
These bars are enchanted with magic
that I've never encountered before.
Here.
Try this.
Ah!
Well, aren't you the clever one?
Glad someone noticed.
(WHOOSHING)
(MEN SHOUTING IN DISTANCE)
We best get going.
MERIDA: No, wait.
Wait, I can't leave.
Arthur took my Wisps.
They're the only way
I can find my brothers.
Right now those Wisps
will only lead you to one thing,
your death.
I assure you, we will find another way
to rescue your brothers.
We found Merlin back in Camelot?
Emma let it slip last night
when she tried to visit Henry.
KILLIAN: If we found that sorcerer,
why the bloody hell didn't he destroy
the darkness in Emma?
You're asking the wrong person.
Well, we can't very well ask him.
That's exactly what we're going to do.
The Crimson Crown?
You figured out how to make
the communication spell work.
Let's just say seeing Emma rip
Violet's heart from her chest
gave me all the motivation I need.
How does this thing work?
Do we simply speak to it?
It's not that easy.
Notjust anyone can summon Merlin.
He'll only appear to someone
who's been chosen by him.
Arthur. Merlin delivered
all the prophecies to him.
So what do you say, Sheriff?
Already on my way.
Wait. Wait.
Why are we wasting
our time with Merlin
when there's someone here
who can help us?
Who?
Rumple.
If he hadn't brought the darkness
back to Storybrooke,
we wouldn't even be
standing here right now.
Rumple may be to blame
for the situation we're in.
But so is Emma.
She was seduced by the darkness
just like he was.
So how does that make
Rumple any different?
Sorry, love. Crocodile
had more chances than anyone.
And right now we need
to give Emma her best chance,
which means contacting Merlin.
And if something bad
happens to Rumple?
It's a risk we'll have to take.
Mmm. Well, maybe you're willing to.
I'm not.
Forgive me, Belle.
MERIDA: Saw you back there.
You're not half bad with magic.
If I was half as good as you,
I would never have ended up
in that dungeon in the first place.
Well, why were you down there?
After I parted ways with the lot of you,
I followed the will-o'-the-wisp
to find where the Clans
are keeping my brothers.
The Wisps led me to the Ivory Sea,
so I stole a boat to make the crossing.
But, unfortunately,
the boat belonged to the wrong fellow.
What, Arthur?
His men captured me
and threw me in that dank prison.
Shh.
Did you hear that?
Huh?
Hear what?
Nothing.
I just needed your friends
to get out of sight.
What?
VVhy?
So they don't see this.
(GROANS)
I've pushed him as hard as I can.
He's at the end of his tether.
You were saying?
(HEART BEATING)
Oh. Go ahead. Crush it.
Better that than helping you
with your dirty work.
Why would I do that
when yourjob isn't finished yet?
What are you on about?
How am I supposed to train him
when he's not even here?
You confirmed the one thing
I needed to know,
Belle's still someone
he's willing to fight for.
It didn't exactly make him a hero,
now, did it?
It Will,
if he wants to stop you.
Stop me? From what?
Killing Belle.
Now, go find her
and put an arrow through her heart.
(BIRDS CHIRPING)
(WATER SLOSHING)
Ooh. I was beginning to worry
you might not wake up.
(GASPS)
Where are you taking me?
Ooh. You got fire. I like that.
But I don't mean to hurt you.
Tell that to the bump on my head.
Without the Wisps,
I need another way to find my brothers.
And that other way
is you.
Oh, yeah. If you needed magic,
you could have just asked.
What, and risked getting a "no?"
Sorry, but I'm more of a
hit-first-ask-questions-Iater kind of lass.
Is that why the Clans
kidnapped your brothers?
Hardly. Those kilted oafs
don't think I can rule the Highlands
without marrying one of them.
I'm not going to marry
someone I don't fancy
just to hold onto my own crown.
After my father's death,
they exiled my mother
then kidnapped my brothers
as ransom.
They'll only free them
if I relinquish the throne.
And you don't plan on doing that.
Would you give up everything you've
ever dreamed ofjust because a man
said you didn't deserve it?
So what do you say?
Will you help me show the Clans
they messed with the wrong queen?
(SOFTLY) Now, where is she keeping you?
(METAL CLANKING)
(PANTING)
(GRUNTS)
(CLANKING CONTINUES)
-Don't hurt me! Don't hurt me! Please!
-(GASPS)
-Please.
-Oh.
Hey, hey, hey. It's okay.
It's just me. It's okay.
Belle?
It's just me.
Is that really you?
Yeah.
-She's after me.
-(BELLE STAMMERS)
It's okay.
You're safe now.
It's okay. It's okay. Hey.
Hey.
(SIGHS) Belle.
Thank you.
What?
I meant...
I meant, when I was in the coma,
all I wanted to do was let go.
After all I've done,
why did I deserve to live?
And then I heard something,
your voice.
After all the things I'd done to you,
you still stood by me.
Belle.
If it wasn't for you,
I wouldn't even be alive.
So, thank you.
(SNIFFLES) Come on. You know,
it won't take Emma long
to figure out where you've gone.
If she wanted to find me,
she would have already.
She wanted me to escape.
That doesn't make sense.
She kidnapped you.
To turn me into a hero.
So I could pull Excalibur from the stone.
So how does letting you escape do that?
She's coming after you.
Me? Why?
To force me to protect you.
She thinks that'll make me
the hero she needs.
Belle, you're in danger.
(SIGHS) Okay, so...
So, what do we do?
The shop.
There's magic there that can help us.
There's magic in there that can help us.
We can use it to find my brothers.
-You sure that the witch isn't home?
-No.
And what does it matter?
We're only going to nip inside
long enough to use her cauldron.
(BUBBLING)
BELLE: Okay.
(HISSING)
(WHOOSHING)
-Do you know where that is?
-I do.
The Southern Moor.
Macintosh, MacGuffin and Dingwall.
The ones who wanted to marry you?
Now you understand
why I want to rule on my own.
(INDISTINCT CHATTER)
I'm guessing they're your brothers.
Aye. What do they mean to do to them?
MACINTOSH: We've waited long enough.
Because Merida has failed
to relinquish her crown
of her own accord,
we have no choice
but to take it from her.
And to punish her for her treachery,
at day's end, her dear brothers
will be executed.
So, they're going to die because of me.
That's not true.
We can still rescue them.
No. We don't have time
to plan a proper escape.
I promise we'll find a way
to save them from this fate.
Fate.
That's it.
There's only one way
to save my brothers now.
I need to change their fate.
And I need you to do it for me.
Was that a kick, my little munchkin?
(LOCK DISENGAGES)
Oh, thank God.
I'm absolutely famished.
And the only thing this little one
seems to want at the moment
is a plate of onion rings.
I'm under strict orders from the Mayor
to only feed you local,
organically-grown produce.
Well, isn't my sister sweet?
Go.
(SCOFFS)
(SIGHS)
Trust me, if anyone knows what it's like
to be pregnant behind bars, it's me.
The Dark Swan.
To what do I owe this honor?
I just wanted to have a little chat.
Afraid I'm not in the mood.
But I suppose
I could be willing to listen.
So tell me,
what kind of trouble
do you want to get into?
DARK SWAN: Eat up.
Dark Ones don'tjudge.
(CHUCKLES)
Despite these greasy treats,
I know this isn't a social call.
What do you want?
Direct. I like that.
Take a look at this.
The Apprentice's Wand.
You're the only one around
who's wielded Merlin's magic
and lived to tell about it.
Aw. It's nice to be appreciated.
If all goes according to plan,
I'll need your help.
(GASPS) How exciting! I can't wait to hear
what you're offering in return.
Your freedom,
and my protection against Regina
and anyone else who wants to hurt you.
So the Dark One's here to make a deal.
How dreadfully unoriginal.
You see, believe it or not,
that patient with the mop loves to talk.
And I hear that you've been very naughty.
Tearing out that little girl's heart
to break your son's?
(LAUGHS) Kudos. That is next level darkness.
Well done.
You think you're allowed to judge
after everything you've done?
No.
But as someone that's been on
the receiving end of a mother's betrayal,
I know that those feelings of hurt
don't go away.
They fester.
So have fun with a lifetime of resentment.
He'll forgive me. He just needs time.
Even with all the time in the world,
some things can't be forgiven.
I don't believe that.
I killed Neal.
Ready to kiss and make up?
Do we have a deal or not?
(SIGHS) I've got my own family problems.
I don't need yours.
I'm trying to turn over a new leaf.
And with the little one on the way,
I wouldn't want to involve myself with
someone that might be a bad influence.
But thanks for the nosh.
If that's all, I'd like to go back to my cell.
You will need an ally in this town.
Maybe not now, but soon.
You'll be back to take my deal.
I don't think so, Emma.
You see, the difference
between you and me is
I don't mind being alone.
All right. The coast is clear.
We should go now.
No, no, no.
I'm sorry. I can't go. I'm sorry.
Your shop's only 100 yards away.
(SIGHS) I'm sorry.
I can't.
You made it out of the woods
and through the mines...
This isn'tjust about you
getting back to your shop, is it?
It's my leg.
It's a reminder of what I was,
when I fled the Ogre Wars.
What I continued to be
when I became the Dark One,
and what I still am, is a coward.
You've told me why
you have that limp before.
Because you walked for days
on a broken foot
just so you could return to your son.
But do you know how the foot
was broken in the first place?
Because you broke it.
So that Baelfire wouldn't grow up
without a father.
Rumple, you may have made
many mistakes in your life,
but this isn't one of them.
I have always seen the man
behind the beast, all right?
But now...
Now, I see something else, too.
A hero.
And you, you just need
to learn to see him, too.
Uh...
(CRACKS)
Uh... Where did you learn to do that?
When I was but a wee devil,
I refused to believe
a bow was just something
my mother tied to my curly locks.
My father agreed.
He said learning to fight was essential,
whether you wore a dress or a kilt.
He was a wise man, that King Fergus.
I wish my father had been
as supportive of my adventures.
He wasn't just supportive.
He taught me everything
I know about shooting. Said to me,
"Lass, if you remember
what you're fighting for,
"you will never miss your target."
Well...
Looks like it was good advice.
Aye.
Now, is my potion done?
Yeah, about that,
do you know
what this potion will do to you?
Think I would ask you
to make it if I didn't?
But it'll turn you into a bear.
No, it changes fate, is what it does.
The Spell of Mor'du, they call it.
Legend says that witch used it
to change the fate of a prince.
Gave him the strength of 10 men.
So you think that
turning yourself into a bear
will make you strong enough
to rescue your brothers?
I know it will.
This isn't the first time
I've seen this magic in action.
But Merida, you don't need magic
to change fate.
How would you know?
I just watched you split arrows
without blinking an eye.
You can make your own fate.
All you need is your wit and your bow.
Isn't that a better way to prove to the Clans
that you're worthy of being their queen?
Afraid that's where you're wrong, missy.
-(BELL JINGLES)
-Come on.
(PANTING)
See? I knew you could make it.
I should've known better
than to argue with you by now.
Here.
Now, what did we come here for?
(GLASS SHATTERS)
(GASPS)
(BELL JINGLES)
I told the Dark One you
wouldn't be daft enough
to seek shelter in your own shop.
But she said you wouldn't be able
to resist the pull of your magic.
Merida, you don't have to do this.
No, I tried to fight it. But I couldn't.
So, now, her fate rests in your hands.
(GASPS)
KILLIAN: What in the bloody hell
is taking so long?
Patience, pirate.
If these spell books are correct,
as soon as Arthur adds
the Crimson Crown to the cauldron,
he should be able
to make contact with Merlin.
Then we'll be speaking with him
before you know it.
David told us everything.
And you're willing to help?
After everything you've done for us,
it's the least I can do.
What are you waiting for?
Perhaps it's best if I do this alone.
Back in Camelot, Merlin delivered
his prophecies to me from inside a tree.
But I'm afraid he only delivered them
when I was alone.
Uh, this is too important to risk.
Come on, let's leave him to it.
(DOOR OPENS)
Did it work?
I'm afraid not.
I thought the spell
was going to make contact, and then,
itjust fizzled out.
(SIGHS)
Stop me, you coward.
Be the hero we all need.
I can't. I can't.
I can't. I'm sorry, Belle.
No. I am.
For what I'm about to do.
All right.
Come on. She's not going
to stay passed out for long.
What's that?
We may not outrun her arrows,
but there's somewhere where this
can keep us safe.
(INDISTINCT CHATTER)
(MEN LAUGHING)
(BREATH TREMBLING)
Hand over the potion.
Why do you need magic
to save your brothers?
(INDISTINCT CHATTER CONTINUES)
Tell me or this ends up on the rocks.
Fine. If you must know.
Not long ago, DunBroch was attacked.
It was an enemy from another land.
My father fought side-by-side
with all the Clans.
And I with him.
As he brought us toward victory,
I saw a helmed knight
heading straight for him.
His sword raised.
My father didn't see the knight.
It was up to me.
I had the enemy in my sights.
I notched an arrow.
Pulled back the bow string.
Took a breath,
steadied my hand and let the arrow fly.
But I missed.
And the knight ran my father through.
My father is dead because of me.
No. It's not your fault.
What do you know of it?
I lost my mother in the Ogre Wars.
I blamed myself, too.
Until I finally realized the truth.
It wasn't my fault.
I forgave myself.
You have to learn to do the same.
I can't.
The Clans,
they lost faith in me that day.
That's why they don't think I can lead.
(SIGHS)
Now, can I have the potion or not?
Thank you.
Now, let's kick some arse.
(STAMMERS) Where are we going?
The only place we'll be safe from Emma
and her quivered friend.
You're taking us out of Storybrooke.
This is anti-transformation powder.
This will keep us safe from any
of the effects from crossing the town line.
No. No. We can't leave.
Not while there are still people
we care about in this town.
Belle, I used to be the Dark One.
I know Emma better
than she knows herself.
She will keep coming
until she gets what she wants.
We'll stop her. Together.
Didn't you see
what happened back there?
I couldn't even protect you from Merida.
Rumple, stop the car.
-What?
-Now!
GOLD: Belle!
Belle!
Belle, what are you doing?
Come back in the car.
BELLE: No.
Please.
(SIGHS)
No. Running never made
anyone a hero, okay?
(STAMMERS) Don't you get it?
I'm not a hero.
-You've been brave before...
-When?
During the first Ogres War?
Let me tell you the truth about that day.
I didn't cripple myself
to get back to my son.
I did it because I was scared.
Rumple...
I joined the army to prove
I wasn't a coward.
But when I had seen the wounded
coming back from the front lines,
I didn't want to die.
I'm a coward, Belle,
and that's never going to change.
Please, come back in the car. Eh?
This is the only way I know
how to protect you. Come on.
Protect yourself, you mean.
-No...
-No, I...
Belle.
Belle!
(SIGHS)
(ENGINE STARTING)
You should have followed your
wee sweetheart over the town line.
Okay. He's not my sweetheart.
And I'm not scared of you.
Aye, but you should be. Because, now,
the Dark One's not taking any chances.
She's making me drink this.
-(BONE CRACKING)
-(GROAN|NG)
(ROARING)
(ROARS)
Men! Today we cement
the rule of our three Clans.
With Merida's brothers out of the way
and Merida in hiding,
the DunBroch claim to the throne
will be erased!
-(SCATTERED CHEERS)
-MER|DA: Not if! have any say in it!
-Merida?
-Let my brothers go.
Unless you want to end up
black as well as blue.
(SCOFFS)
You and what army?
This one.
Just you wait.
In a moment,
you're gonna be very, very sorry.
(PANTING)
-Did you mix it right?
-Yes.
But I switched the potion with water.
What game are you playing?
Where's the real potion?
You defeat the Clans with magic,
the people still won't follow you.
You need to defeat them as a queen.
If you wanted to teach me a lesson,
you should've done it
before we were surrounded.
I knew you wouldn't face your fear
unless you had no choice.
Look. I know you can do this.
MACINTOSH: Enough, Merida.
The only way you and your brothers
live out this day
is if you relinquish your crown.
After everything my father did
to create peace between the Clans?
Never.
Clan DunBroch is the rightful leader
of the four Clans.
And I am the sole and rightful queen.
Then you leave us no choice.
(ECHOING) Fire!
No!
(MEN MURMURING)
You saw what I can do with an arrow.
Do you really want to see
what I can do with a sword?
Now, let them go!
You too?
You're lucky someone once
taught me the value of mercy.
(MERIDA SOBBING)
(KISSES)
It's okay.
It's okay. Everything's gonna be okay.
Mother's going to be
so happy to see you.
(GROWLING)
(SHRIEKS)
(WHIMPERING)
(GROWLING)
Merida, listen to me!
Don't do this!
(ROARS)
(THUDS)
No! No! She'll kill you!
Rumple, run!
No, Belle.
I'm not running this time.
No!
Go!
(GROWLING)
BELLE: No!
(SNIFFING)
(GROWLS)
Do your worst.
(ROARS)
(GRUNTS)
(GROANING)
(ROARING)
(BELLE PANTING)
(STAMMERS) How did you know that would
transform her back?
I didn't.
(SIGHS)
I knew you had it in you.
You saved me.
Actually,
I think you saved me.
Sure, I can't help you
on your friends' quest?
It's the least I can do.
(CHUCKLES) No. Thank you for your offer,
but your kingdom
needs their queen right now.
What will you do
about the man you love?
Or loved?
I still don't know.
All I can do is hope I get home
and find a way to save him.
But, succeed or fail,
I do know one thing.
I won't give up.
You don't strike me
as the giving up type.
(CHUCKLES) Well, I do hope
our paths cross again.
Thank you, Belle.
For everything.
Come on.
Everything all right?
You tell me. I have the strangest
sense of déja vu right now.
You know,
I've always wanted to try one of these.
The last time I had the chance,
it was in the hands of a little girl
with sticky fingers.
USHER: Don't.
I'm sorry.
-You.
-You remember.
I'm flattered.
You were the usher.
At the movie theater when I was a kid.
How is that possible?
You were still stuck
in the tree back then.
It doesn't matter
how I got my message to you.
What's important is,
do you remember what I said?
You said
something about Excalibur.
And you told me...
That one day
you would have the opportunity
to remove Excalibur from its stone.
I hate to burst your bubble.
Someone beat me to it.
Perhaps.
But the sword will return
to whence it came.
And now that the darkness is within you,
it's more important than ever
that you heed the rest of my warning.
Leave Excalibur alone.
The fate of everyone that you love
rests upon it.
He bested me, fair and square.
I was getting worried.
For a moment, I thought I was going
to have to drag you down here myself.
No, a hero never runs away
from his problems.
Now.
AS a former Dark One,
I know you won't stop wreaking havoc
until I pull that sword from that stone.
Good, we understand each other.
And I also know
that you won't be able to resist
making a deal.
So, how about I pull Excalibur
in exchange for Merida's heart?
And my brothers.
I want to know what happened to them.
Do you really think you're
in a position to make deals?
That's exactly what I think.
(BONE CRUNCHES)
(HEART BEATING)
(GROANS)
I was finished with this anyway.
(PANTING)
And her brothers?
They're fine.
Safe and sound by her mother's Side.
Now, get on with it.
BELLE: Wait.
Then you will be sweeping his remains
from the floor. You were his maid once.
Belle.
Just in case this doesn't work,
I want you to know
that I am sorry for everything.
If I had to do it all again,
I would make sure I was the man
you deserved right from the very start.
And, I would change everything for you.
It's never too late.
Well, well.
A deal's a deal.
Now, you may have Excalibur,
but you've made one mistake in all of this.
One terrible mistake.
You've turned me into a hero.
There are heroes all over this town,
and none of them
have been able to stop me yet.
That's because none of them
are me.
You've checked over
that Spell a dozen times, Regina.
I did everything right.
Arthur Should have been able
to communicate with Merlin.
DAVID: Unless he didn't want to.
The Crimson Crown.
Arthur threw it into the fire.
He sabotaged the Spell.
He lied to us.
I guess he didn't realize
magical toadstools don't burn.
But why wouldn't he
want us to contact Merlin?
(SIGHS) We need to talk to Merlin now
more than ever.
Unfortunately,
we need someone he's chosen.
The Apprentice is dead.
We're out of options, love.
REGINA: Perhaps not.
There is one other person in
Storybrooke who was chosen by Merlin.
The Author.
-Are you sure you're up for this?
-|'m fine, Mom.
It's just...
I know you've been through a lot.
The person who ripped out
Violet's heart isn't my mother.
But Emma is still
in there somewhere.
And I'll do anything it takes
to get her back.
You can do this, lad.
Merlin?
If you're receiving this message,
then things are worse than I feared.
I don't believe this.
We're getting Merlin's voicemail?
There is only one person who can help
you defeat the Dark One now.
Her name is Nimue.
Who's Nimue?
If you want to destroy the darkness,
then you must...
What the hell did Emma do to him?